---
layout: page
title: Ch. 12
nav_order: 7
parent: Start of the Siege
---

# Ch. 12

# Water Crisis

Illi[^1] autem frumenti[^2] quidem aliarumque omnium rerum intus habebant copiam, praeter aquam. aquae vero penuria eos affligebat : quia neque fons[^3] erat intra civitatem, et imbre[^4] contentis habitatoribus, rara[^5] est in illo tractu[^6] aestivis mensibus pluvia. quo tempore obsessi[^7] etiam hoc[^8] vehementius[^9] afficiebantur, quod arcendae[^10] siti fuerat excogitatum: quodque[^11] fieri, velut[^12] omnis aqua iam defecisset, aegre[^13] ferebant. Josephus enim cum et civitatem videret abundare aliis rebus fortesque[^14] animo viros esse, quo[^15] longiorem Romanis obsidionem faceret, quam sperabant, iam tum potum[^16] mensura civibus ministrabat. illis autem conservari[^17] aquam penuria gravius esse videbatur[^18]: amplioremque cupiditatem movebat, quod ius[^19] bibendi liberum non haberent : ac velut ad extremam sitim perventum[^20] esset, labori[^21] cedebant. Hoc[^22] autem modo affecti, Romanos latere[^23] non poterant, qui[^24] ex adverso colle trans murum in unum eos confluere locum, et aquae mensuram accipere prospectabant: quo[^25] etiam balistarum[^26] pervenientibus telis, plurimos occidebant. 



[^1]: *Illi:* this refers to the Jews besieged within Jotapata  
   
[^2]: *frumenti ... rerum*: connect these genitives with *copiam* later on  
   
[^3]: *fons:* “fountain,” meaning a natural spring so that the city can have water. The only other option was to travel out of the city  
   
[^4]: *imbre ontentis habitatoribus:* **ablative absolute**  
   
[^5]: *rara est:* take *pluvia* as your subject later on  
   
[^6]: *tractu*: take *tractus, \-us* (m) as “region.” Rain is rare in the summer months in this region given the desert climate.  
   
[^7]: *obsessi*: take this **PPP** as your subject, *those having been besieged*  
   
[^8]: *hoc:* **ablative of means**, *by this thing*  
   
[^9]: *vehementius:* the \-*ius* makes this a **comparative adjective**, *more severely*  
   
[^10]: *arcendae siti: sitis, sitis* (f) – thirst. The whole phrase is a **gerundive**, *for the warding off of thirst*  
   
[^11]: *quodque fieri*: take this after the *aegre ferebant* later on, *they were enduring badly **what happened***  
   
[^12]: *velut*: *as if*  
   
[^13]: *aegre ferebant*: *fero* can also be *endure* or *bear*, in addition to *carry* and *bring*  
   
[^14]: *fortesque animo viros: animo* is **ablative of respect**  
   
[^15]: *quo....faceret*: sigh, sometimes the *quo* can be taken as an *ut*, so take this as a **purpose clause**  
   
[^16]: *potum mensura....ministrabat*: *he was administering the drink by a ration*, meaning allotting only a set portion to each person
   
[^17]: *conservari*: **passive infinitive**  
   
[^18]: *videbatur*: *video* in the passive can also be “seem,” as we’ve seen a few times  
   
[^19]: *ius bibendi liberum: free right of drinking*, with *bibendi* as a **gerund**  
   
[^20]: *perventum esset:* an **impersonal passive**, literally “it has been reached,” but you can flip it around to be “they had reached” to make it active  
   
[^21]: *Labori*: take this as *hardship* or *struggle*  
   
[^22]: *hoc modo affecti*: take the *affecti* as your nominative subject, describing the Jews  
   
[^23]: *Latere*: *lateo, \-ere* means “to escape the notice of” and it takes an **accusative** of whose notice it escapes  

[^24]: *Qui…..Prospectabant*: jump to the very end for your main verb, which starts off indirect statement.  
   
[^25]: *Quo*: **ablative of location,** *where*  
   
[^26]: *Balistarum*: a *balista* is a siege weapon designed to throw bolts or stones
