---
layout: page
title: Ch. 13
nav_order: 8
parent: Start of the Siege
---

# Ch. 13

# Josephus' Water Trick

Vespasianus quidem non multo[^1] post, exhaustis puteis, ipsa[^2] sibi necessitate traditum[^3] iri civitatem sperabat. Josephus autem, ut hanc eius[^4] spem frangeret, iussit quam[^5] plurimos per murorum primas immersa[^6] undis atque humida vestimenta suspendere, ut omnes repente aqua perfluerent. ex quo moeror[^7] simul Romanis ac timor erat, cum tantum[^8] aquae viderent eos ludibrio[^9] consumere, quos potu[^10] indigere credebant. Denique dux[^11] belli etiam ipse, quia penuria civitatem posse capere desperasset, iterum consilium ad vim atque arma convertit : Judaeis[^12] quoque id maxime cupientibus, quod nec se nec civitatem salvam fore[^13] credebant, et priusquam[^14] fame, vel siti perirent, mortem bello optabant.


[^1]: *multo post*: *multo* is **ablative degree of difference**, *not much after*  

[^2]: *ipsa …. necessitate*: *necessitas, \-tatis* is feminine (as all \-*tas, \-tatis* 3rd declension adjectives are), so take *ipsa* and *necessitate* together  

[^3]: *traditum iri civitatem sperabat:* jump to *sperabat* as your main verb, which starts off **indirect statement.** The *traditum iri* is a super rare construction (PPP \+ *iri*) where the *iri* acts as a passive infinitive of *eo*, making this a **future passive infinitive**, *would be handed over.* I’m fairly confident we won’t ever see this again  

[^4]: *eius spem:* the *eius* refers to Vespasian  

[^5]: *quam plurimos*: *quam* \+ **superlative** is *as ……as possible*  

[^6]: *immersa undis atque humida vestimenta*: *clothes wet and having been immersed in water.* A bit redundant, but hey, that’s life sometimes  

[^7]: *moeror:* take this as the subject, meaning *grief*  

[^8]: *tantum aquae*: literally “so much of water” *so much water*  

[^9]: *ludibrio*: *in mockery,* **ablative of manner**  

[^10]: *potu indigere*: *indigere* \+ **ablative of separation** is *to lack*  

[^11]: *dux belli:* Vespasian  

[^12]: *Judaeis quoque id maxime cupientibus,*: you should *absolutely* know what this is... And the *id* is for the Romans to take the city. Although contradictory, Josephus goes on to explain the reasoning behind the Jews’ desire here  

[^13]: *fore*: **future infinitive of *sum***, often found in **indirect statement** as it is here. A very good word to know\!  

[^14]: *et priusquam ….. optabant.:* Take the ending phrase first, *mortem bello optabant*, then the remaining parts. While certainly a brutal sentence to read, this kind of desperation is all too common in sieges
