---
layout: page
title: Ch. 6+7
nav_order: 4
parent: Start of the Siege
---

# Ch. 6

# Initial Conflict

Nihiloque[^1] minus, Romanis[^2] postridie iterum irruentibus occurrunt multoque[^3] fortius restiterunt ; ex eo scilicet[^4] fiduciam nacti[^5], quod eos pridie praeter[^6] spem sustinuerant. sed eos quoque pugnaciores experti[^7] sunt, quod eorum iracundiam pudor incenderat, vinci[^8] credentium, nisi cito vicissent. Itaque per dies quinque Romanis minime ab aggressione cessantibus, etiam Jotapatenorum[^9] excursus agebantur, murique fortius oppugnabantur. Et neque Judaei vires hostium formidabant, neque Romanos difficultas[^10] oppidi capiendi lassabat.

# Ch. 7 in English

Now Jotapata is almost all of it built on a precipice, having on all the other sides of it every way valleys immensely deep and steep, insomuch that those who would look down would have their sight fail them before it reaches to the bottom. It is only to be come at on the north side, where the utmost part of the city is built on the mountain, as it ends obliquely at a plain. This mountain Josephus had encompassed with a wall when he fortified the city, that its top might not be capable of being seized upon by the enemies. The city is covered all round with other mountains, and can no way be seen till a man comes just upon it. And this was the strong situation of Jotapata.




[^1]: *nihiloque minus:* literally “less by nothing”, or a more natural translation would be “and nevertheless.” *Nihilo* is an **ablative degree of difference**, showing to what degree it is *minus*

[^2]: *Romanis…occurrunt: occurro*, \-*ere* takes a dative, which here is *Romanis*  

[^3]: *multoque fortius:* the \-*ius* makes this a **comparison adverb**. *multo* is another **ablative degree of difference**, *much more strongly*  

[^4]: *sciliet:* adverb meaning *obviously*  

[^5]: *nacti:* from *nanciscor, \-ari,* **deponent PPP**, meaning *having obtained*, describes the subject which is the Jews  

[^6]: *praeter spem: praeter* usually means *except*, **except** for here, where it means *beyond*  

[^7]: *experti sunt:* the subject is now the Romans without any warning, surprise\!  

[^8]: *vinci credentium:* this is tricky, *credentium* describes the *eorum*, which refers to the Romans. It also starts off **indirect statement** with *vinci* as your **passive infinitive**  

[^9]: *Jotapatenorum:* note that this is *the people of Jotapata*  

[^10]: *difficultas oppidi capiendi*: _oppidi capiendi_ is a **gerundive** (FPP \+ a noun), meaning *the difficultly **of capturing the city**. Difficultas, \-tatis* (f) is 3rd declension nominative  

