---
layout: page
title: Ch. 86
nav_order: 3
parent: Fall of Alesia
---

# Ch. 86

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#86)

## Title 

His rebus cognitis Caesar Labienum[^1] cum cohortibus[^2] sex subsidio[^3] laborantibus mittit: 2 imperat, si sustinere non posset, deductis cohortibus eruptione pugnaret; id[^4] nisi necessario ne faciat. 3 Ipse adit reliquos, cohortatur ne[^5] labori succumbant; omnium[^6] superiorum dimicationum[^7] fructum[^8] in eo die atque hora docet consistere[^9]. 4 Interiores[^10] desperatis campestribus[^11] locis propter magnitudinem munitionum loca praerupta ex ascensu temptant: huc[^12] ea quae paraverant conferunt. 5 Multitudine telorum ex turribus propugnantes[^13] deturbant, aggere et cratibus fossas explent, falcibus[^14] vallum ac loricam rescindunt.


[^1]: *Labienum*: [Titus Labienus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Labienus) was one of Caesar’s top legates during the Gallic Wars, but turns against him during the Civil War with Pompey

[^2]: *Cohortibus*: a cohort is a unit of around 480 men. There were ten cohorts to a legion. This smaller group allowed for more nimble and coordinated movements on the battlefield

[^3]: *subsidio laborantibus*: **DOUBLE DATIVE\!\!**

[^4]: *id nisi necessario ne faciat*: *ne faciat* is a **negative indirect command** after *imperat* above. Take it first, in this order: *ne faciat id nisi necessario*

[^5]: *ne labori succumbant*: another **negative indirect command**

[^6]: *omnium superiorum…..consistere*: jump to the *docet* as your main verb

[^7]: *dimicationum*: *dimicatio, \-onis (f)* \= *proelium, \-i (n)* \= *pugna, \-ae (f)*

[^8]: *fructum*: *fructum* here means “fruit” in the metaphorical sense, like the *fruit of your labor,* or *reward*

[^9]: *consistere*: *to rely on, to rest on*

[^10]: *Interiores*: this refers to the Gauls coming from Alesia out towards Caesar’s inner walls

[^11]: *campestribus locis*: *the level ground*

[^12]: *huc: to here*

[^13]: *propugnantes*: important to note that this is the **accusative direct object** of *deturbant*, NOT its subject. It refers to Caesar’s men. *propugno* means “to fight on the defensive.” Take this as a **substantive adjective/participle**, *the defenders*

[^14]: *falcibus*: *falx, falcis* (f), as we’ve seen before, are “grappling hooks”
