---
layout: page
title: Ch. 87
nav_order: 4
parent: Fall of Alesia
---

# Ch. 87

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#87)

## Caesar in Action 

Mittit primo Brutum[^1] adulescentem cum cohortibus Caesar, post cum aliis Gaium[^2] Fabium legatum; postremo ipse[^3], cum vehementius pugnaretur[^4], integros subsidio[^5] adducit. 2 Restituto proelio ac repulsis hostibus eo[^6] quo Labienum miserat contendit[^7]; cohortes quattuor ex proximo castello deducit, equitum partem sequi[^8], partem circumire[^8] exteriores munitiones et ab tergo hostes adoriri[^8][^9] iubet. 3 Labienus[^10], postquam neque aggeres neque fossae vim hostium sustinere poterant, coactis[^11] una[^12] XL cohortibus, quas ex proximis praesidiis[^13] deductas fors[^14] obtulit, Caesarem per nuntios facit[^15] certiorem quid[^16] faciendum existimet. Accelerat Caesar, ut proelio intersit.


[^1]: *Brutum adulescentem*: This “young Brutus,” [Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decimus_Junius_Brutus_Albinus#Activity_in_Gallia_Cisalpina), is a cousin of the main Brutus, [Marcus Junius Brutus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Junius_Brutus), the former friend and assassin of Caesar. Young Brutus served as a top commander under Caesar, but also turns on him and takes part in the assassination on the Ides of March

[^2]: *Gaium Fabium*: Gaius Fabius is another legate of Caesar. He is prominent towards the end of the Gallic Wars, sides with Caesar in the Civil War with Pompey, but then largely disappears from the historical scene

[^3]: *Ipse*: this refers to Caesar

[^4]: *Pugnaretur*: as we’ve seen, this is an **impersonal passive**. *It was being fought* → *they were fighting*

[^5]: *Subsidio*: this is just a **dative of purpose**, which is NOT part of a **double dative**, since you’re missing the **dative of interest.** Translate it as *as help/relief*

[^6]: *eo quo*: *to the spot (in) which*

[^7]: *contendit*: *contendo, \-ere* is usually going to be “to rush, to hurry”

[^8]: *sequi, circumire, adoriri*: when you see al lof these **infinitives**, you should look forward to see if you have a verb that will require an infinitive.

[^9]: *Adoriri*: note this as a **passive infinitive** from *adoirio, \-ire* – “to attack, assault”

[^10]: *Labienus*: [Titus Labienus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Labienus) was one of Caesar’s top legates whom we saw Caesar send out with reinforcements in chapter 86

[^11]: *Coactis*: *cogo, \-ere* can mean “to gather/collect,” but also “to compel, to force.” Both meanings are good to remember

[^12]: *Una*: often, *una* will be the adverb meaning “together, at once, as one,” especially when it does not describe another noun, as in “*una villa,”* for example

[^13]: *ex proximis praesidiis*: a *praesidium* is a “fort/post”

[^14]: *fors*: this is your **nominative subject** here. Caesar is stressing the luck that helped him win, though, for the Romans, being lucky shows that you have the favor of the gods

[^15]: *facit certiorem*: *facere certiorem* is an expression that literally means “to make \[someone\] more certain,” but can also be translated as “to inform \[someone\]”

[^16]: *quid faciendum existimet*: this is an **indirect question** following the *Caesarem facit ceteriorem.* “He informs Caesar *(of) what he thinks must be done*” with *faciendum* as an **FPP**.
