---
layout: page
title: Ch. 88
nav_order: 5
parent: Fall of Alesia
---

# Ch. 88

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#88)

## Title 

Eius adventu ex colore vestitus[^1] cognito, quo[^2] insigni in proeliis uti[^3] consuerat, turmisque[^4] equitum[^5] et cohortibus visis quas se sequi iusserat, ut[^6] de locis superioribus haec[^7] declivia et devexa cernebantur, hostes proelium committunt. 2 Utrimque[^8] clamore sublato excipit rursus ex vallo atque omnibus munitionibus clamor. Nostri omissis[^9] pilis gladiis[^10] rem gerunt. 3 Repente post[^11] tergum equitatus cernitur; cohortes aliae appropinquant. Hostes terga[^12] vertunt; fugientibus[^13] equites occurrunt. Fit[^14] magna caedes. Sedulius[^15], dux et princeps Lemovicum[^16], occiditur; 4 Vercassivellaunus[^17] Arvernus vivus in fuga comprehenditur; signa[^18] militaria septuaginta quattuor ad Caesarem referuntur: pauci ex tanto numero se incolumes in castra recipiunt. 5 Conspicati[^19] ex oppido caedem et fugam suorum desperata[^20] salute copias a munitionibus reducunt. 6 Fit protinus hac re audita ex castris Gallorum fuga. Quod[^21] nisi crebris subsidiis ac totius diei labore milites[^22] essent[^23] defessi, omnes hostium copiae deleri[^24] potuissent. 7 De media nocte missus equitatus novissimum[^25] agmen consequitur: magnus numerus capitur atque interficitur; reliqui[^26] ex fuga in civitates discedunt.


[^1]: *Vestitus*: a *vestitus* is a cloak, often worn by a general

[^2]: *quo insigni*: *which sign/mark*

[^3]: *uti*: *utor* is a **PUFFV verb**, which means that, instead of taking an accusative direct object, it takes an **ablative object**

[^4]: *turmis*: a *turma* is a squadron (smaller group of soldiers)

[^5]: *turmisque equitum et cohortibus visis*: this is another **ablative absolute**, and the **relative clause** (started off by *quas*) describes both the *turmis* and the *cohortibus*

[^6]: *ut de locis …. cernebantur*: remember that *ut* \+ the **indicative**, as you have here, just means *as*

[^7]: *haec declivia et devexa*: *these slopes and hills.* This refers to the area where Caesar is rushing up, saying that it is easy to see his approach, given the geography

[^8]: *Utrim*: *on both sides*, referring to both the internal and external Gauls shouting to alert one another

[^9]: *omissis pilis*: **ablative absolute**

[^10]: *gladiis*: take this as an **ablative of means** with the phrase *rem gerunt*

[^11]: *post tergum*: *behind the enemies’ back*

[^12]: *terga vertunt*: *tergum vertere* \= “to turn your back” → to flee

[^13]: *fugientibus equites occurrunt*: *occurro* takes a **dative of reference**

[^14]: *fit*: *fio* is often translated as “it happens” or just “there is”

[^15]: *Sedulius*: nothing else is known about this leader, though Caesar must have been impressed with his bravery to mention him here

[^16]: *Lemovicum*: the [Lemovices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lemovices) were a Gallic tribe hostile to Caesar

[^17]: *Vercassivellaunus*: recall that this is the Gaul leading the ambush party to Caesar’s vulnerable camp on the hillside. He is also a relative of Vercingetorix

[^18]: *signa militaria*: remember how vital these standards are to the Romans. Even if they are not as important to the Gauls, you can still see why the Romans would want to capture them

[^19]: *Conspicati*: note that **deponent PPPs** are still active *having seen*

[^20]: *desperata salute*: **ablative** **absolute**

[^21]: *Quod nisi*: *but if ……not*

[^22]: *Milites*: these are Caesar’s soldiers

[^23]: *Defessi…… potuissent*: two **pluperfect subjunctive verbs** (-*isse* \+ endings) will give you a **contrary to fact if clause** (another Mr. Clark favorite\!). *if they had not been……they would have been able to….* Note that they WERE tired, so they were NOT able, hence the “contrary to fact”

[^24]: *Deleri*: note the **passive infinitive**, *to be destroyed*

[^25]: *novissimum agmen*: *novissimum* means “newest,” but here will be “the rear” meaning “the most recent in the line”

[^26]: *reliqui*: this refers to the Gauls fleeing the end of the siege
