---
layout: page
title: Ch. 90
nav_order: 7
parent: Fall of Alesia
---

# Ch. 90

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#90)

## Wrapping Up 

His[^1] rebus confectis in Aeduos proficiscitur[^2]; civitatem recipit. 2 Eo[^3] legati ab Arvernis missi quae[^4][^5] imperaret se facturos pollicentur. Imperat magnum numerum obsidum[^6]. 3 Legiones in hiberna[^7] mittit. Captivorum circiter viginti milia Aeduis Arvernisque reddit. 4 Titum Labienum[^8] duabus cum legionibus et equitatu in Sequanos[^9] proficisci iubet: huic[^10] Marcum Sempronium Rutilum[^11] attribuit. 5 Gaium Fabium[^12] legatum et Lucium Minucium Basilum[^13] cum legionibus duabus in Remis[^14] collocat, ne[^15] quam ab finitimis Bellovacis[^16] calamitatem accipiant. 6 Gaium Antistium Reginum[^17] in Ambivaretos[^18], Titum Sextium[^19] in Bituriges[^20], Gaium Caninium Rebilum[^21] in Rutenos[^22] cum singulis[^23] legionibus mittit. 7 Quintum Tullium Ciceronem[^24] et Publium Sulpicium[^25] Cabilloni[^26] et Matiscone in Aeduis[^27] ad Ararim[^28] rei[^29] frumentariae causa collocat. Ipse Bibracte[^30] hiemare constituit. His[^31] litteris cognitis Romae[^32] dierum viginti supplicatio[^33] redditur.


[^1]: *His rebus confectis*: *conficio, \-ere* – “to complete”

[^2]: *Proficiscitur*: Caesar is the subject of this verb

[^3]: *Eo*: *there* or *in this (spot)*, **ablative of location**

[^4]: *quae imperaret se facturos pollicentur*: Take in this order \- *pollicentur se facturos quae imperaret*

[^5]: *quae imperaret*: *the things which he ordered*

[^6]: *obsidum*: *obses, obsidis* (m/f) is a “hostage.” These were often the children of prominent Gallic families who were handed over to the Romans, and acted as insurance that their tribe would not rebel out of fear that, if they did, these hostages would be killed

[^7]: *in hiberna*: *into winter camps*. The Romans stationed their men in camps during the winter, since fighting largely stopped due to unfriendly weather. This allowed the men to regroup, rest, and continue to train

[^8]: *Titum Labienum*: as we've seen, [Titus Labienus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Labienus) was one of Caesar’s top legates during the Gallic Wars, but turned against him during the Civil War with Pompey.  

[^9]: *in Sequanos*: the [Sequani](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sequani) were a prominent Gallic tribe

[^10]: *huic*: dative, masculine, singular, referring to Titus Labienus, *to him*

[^11]: *Marcum Sempronium Rutilum*: we have no other historical mention of this figure

[^12]: *Gaium Fabium*: Gaius Fabius is another legate of Caesar, mentioned in Chapter 87

[^13]: *Lucium Minucium Basilum*: Basilus is another legate of Caesar, mentioned in DBG 6

[^14]: *in Remis*: The [Remi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remi) are a notable Gallic tribe because they ally themselves with Caesar early on and then remain loyal through the course of the Gallic Wars

[^15]: *ne quam ab finitimis Bellovacis calamitatem accipiant*: *quam* is short for *aliquam*, since “after *si, nisi, num,* and *ne*, all the ali-s fly away.” This is a **negative purpose clause**

[^16]: *ab finitimis Bellovacis*: The [Bellovaci](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bellovaci) are a Gallic tribe previously subjugated by Caesar

[^17]: *Gaium Antistium Reginum*: we have no other historical mention of this figure

[^18]: *Ambivaretos*: we are unsure where this Gallic tribe was located

[^19]: *Titum Sextium*: we have no other historical mention of this figure

[^20]: *in Bituriges*: The [Bituriges](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bituriges_Cubi) are a Gallic tribe, beaten by Caesar

[^21]: *Gaium Caninium Rebilum*: a military tribune and close ally of Caesar who sticks with him through the Civil War with Pompey

[^22]: *in Rutenos*: the [Ruteni](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruteni) are another Gallic tribe

[^23]: *cum singulis legionibus*: *with one legion each*

[^24]: *Quintum Tullium Ciceronem*: This [Quintus Tullius Cicero](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quintus_Tullius_Cicero) is the younger brother of [Marcus Tullius Cicero](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cicero), the famous orator and statesmen. He is notable for successfully defending a Roman camp against an ambush of Gauls in DBG 5\. This Cicero allied himself with Pompey during the Civil War, but was later pardoned by Caesar

[^25]: *Publium Sulpicium*: an otherwise unknown legate of Caesar

[^26]: *Cabilloni et Matiscone*: both of these are **locative case**. *At Cabillonum and Matisco*, which are two cities in central Gaul

[^27]: *in Aeduis*: the [Aedui](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aedui) were a prominent Gallic tribe.

[^28]: *ad Ararim*: this is the Arar River, which is today called [the Saône](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sa%C3%B4ne). It is a tributary of the Rhone river in southern Gaul

[^29]: *rei frumentariae causa*: *for the cause of the grain supply,* literally “the grain matter”

[^30]: *Bibracte*: **locative case**. Notably, Caesar spends the winter in Gaul, rather than in the Roman province of Cis-Alpine Gaul. This likely shows that he did not trust the peace to hold

[^31]: *His litteris cognitis*: *with these books/accounts/records having been known*, this refers to Caesar’s work *De bello Gallico* being published

[^32]: *Romae*: **locative case**, *at/in Rome*

[^33]: *Supplicatio*: a *[supplicatio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supplicatio)* is a Roman religious holiday of thanksgiving, or other times used in crisis to pray for divine aid
