---
layout: page
title: Ch. 68
nav_order: 1
parent: Surrounding Alesia
---

# Ch. 68

## Title 

Fugato[^1] omni equitatu Vercingetorix[^2] copias[^3], ut[^4] pro castris collocaverat, reduxit protinusque Alesiam[^5], quod[^6] est oppidum Mandubiorum, iter[^7] facere coepit celeriterque impedimenta[^8] ex castris educi[^9] et se[^10] subsequi iussit. 2 Caesar impedimentis[^11] in proximum collem deductis, duabus[^12] legionibus praesidio relictis, secutus[^13] quantum diei tempus est[^14] passum, circiter[^15] tribus milibus hostium ex[^16] novissimo agmine interfectis altero die ad Alesiam castra fecit. 3 Perspecto[^17] urbis situ perterritisque hostibus, quod[^18] equitatu[^19], qua[^20] maxime parte exercitus confidebant, erant pulsi, adhortatus[^21] ad laborem milites circumvallare instituit.


[^1]: _Fugato omni equitatu_: _Fugo, fugare, fugavi, fugatus_ means “to put to flight,” NOT _fugio, fugere_, which means “to flee.” Caesar is (usually) quite friendly with putting his **ablative absolutes** towards the front of his sentences/clauses

[^2]: _Vercingetorix_: [Vercingetorix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vercingetorix), the leader of the [Averni](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arverni) (a powerful Gallic tribe). He has been chosen to lead the Gallic confederation against Caesar and the Romans, hoping to oust them permanently from Gaul.

[^3]: _Copias_: _copiae_ can be “supplies” (usually when singular) or “troops” (usually when plural). Use context clues to figure it out. Take this as your **direct object** of _reduxit_ later on

[^4]: _ut pro castris collocaverat_: _ut_ + **indicative** is going to be "as", compared to _ut_ + **subjunctive** for a **purpose/result/** etc **clause**

[^5]: _Alesiam_: [Alesia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alesia_(city)) is a major _oppidum_, fortified town, of the [Mandubii](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandubii), a Gallic tribe in central-eastern Gaul

[^6]: _quod est oppidum Mandubiorum_: remember that while we love a _quod_ = because, there is also _quod_ = which

[^7]: _iter facere_: literally “to make a journey,” you can go with _travel_ too

[^8]: _impedimenta ex castris educi et se subsequi iussit_: iu_beo, ibuere, iussi, iussus_ takes an **ACC + infinitive**. _Impedeimenta_ means “baggage,” the armor and supplies that soldiers carry with them as they march.

[^9]: _Educi_: this is a **passive infinitive**, "to be verb-ed". You can recognize them by the final -_i_
        	(-are → -ari;    -ēre  →  -eri;    -ere  →  -i;    -ire  →  -iri)

[^10]: _se subsequi_: _subsequi_ is a **deponent infinitive**, so it stays active, _to follow_. _Se_ here is **accusative direct object**, NOT **accusative subject**

[^11]: _impedimentis in ….. praesidio relictis_: you have two **ablative absolutes** here, in spite of having _Caesar_ in the **nominative** in front of them. Find a conjugated main verb that he is the subject of

[^12]: _duabus legionibus praesidio relictis_: _praesidio_ is **dative of purpose** here, _having been left behind **as protection**_ **(_for the purpose of protection_)**

[^13]: _secutus_: agrees with Caesar above, _having followed_. **Deponent PPP** of _sequor_

[^14]: _est passum_: _passum_ is the **PPP** of _patior_ meaning “to allow, permit, suffer.” A **deponent PPP** (with or without a form of _sum_) stays active, _the time of the day **has allowed**_

[^15]: _circiter tribus …. interfectis_: another **ablative absolute**!

[^16]: _ex novissimo agmine_: _from the furthest battle line_, _novus, -a, -um _can be “new, young, most recent”, etc

[^17]: _Perspecto urbis situ perterritisque hostibus_: you **absolutely** know what’s going on here!

[^18]: _Quod_: explaining why the enemies were scared

[^19]: _Equitatu …. erant pulsi_: _they had been driven off **from their horsemen_**, talking about the best part of their army being beaten back from the bulk of their forces. _Equitatu_ is **ablative of separation**

[^20]: _qua maxime parte exercitus_: _qua parte_ is _on which part_. Remember that _exercitus_ is **4th declension**, so most of the endings are -_us_. This is **genitive singular** here, _on which part **of the army**_

[^21]: _adhortatus_: again, this **nominative PPP** goes back to _Caesar_, our only nominative, masculine, singular noun in this sentence
