---
layout: page
title: Ch. 69
nav_order: 2
parent: Surrounding Alesia
---

# Ch. 69

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#69)

## Description of Alesia 

Ipsum[^1] erat oppidum Alesia in colle summo admodum[^2] edito loco, ut[^3] nisi obsidione expugnari non posse videretur; 2 cuius[^4] collis radices duo duabus ex partibus flumina subluebant. 3 Ante id oppidum planities circiter milia passuum tria in longitudinem patebat[^5]: 4 reliquis ex omnibus partibus colles[^6] mediocri[^7] interiecto spatio pari[^8] altitudinis fastigio oppidum cingebant. 5 Sub muro, quae pars[^9] collis ad orientem solem spectabat, hunc omnem locum copiae Gallorum compleverant fossamque[^10] et maceriam sex[^11] in altitudinem pedum praeduxerant. 6 Eius[^12] munitionis quae ab Romanis instituebatur circuitus XI milia passuum tenebat. 7 Castra opportunis[^13] locis erant posita ibique castella[^14] viginti tria facta, quibus in castellis interdiu stationes[^15] ponebantur, ne[^16] qua subito eruptio fieret: haec[^17] eadem noctu excubitoribus ac firmis praesidiis tenebantur.


[^1]: *Ipsum erat oppidum Alesia*: *ipsum oppidum* would be “the fortified town itself”

[^2]: *admodum edito loco*: **ablative of location**, *on a very high spot*

[^3]: *ut nisi ….. videretur*: think about what kind of _ut_ clause this is! *Video* in the **passive** can be “seem.” Recognize *expugnari* as a **passive infinitive**.

[^4]: *cuius collis …. subluebant*: take in this order - *duo flumina subluebant  radices cuius collis ex duabus partibus*. The phrase *radices cuius collis* is *the bases of which hill*

[^5]: *Patebat*: *pateo, -ere* is “to stand open,” used for giving the dimensions of a space or object

[^6]: *colles*: these *colles* are more minor hills that surround Alesia.

[^7]: *mediocri interiecto spatio*: *with an average space in between*, **ablative of description**

[^8]: *pari altitudinis fastigio*: *with a peak equal in (of) height*, another **ablative of description**

[^9]: *pars collis*: A 3rd declension noun whose nominative ends in -*is* will have an identical genitive singular (*ensis, collis, avis, canis, finis* etc). We can tell through context that it’s genitive here, _part **of the hill**_

[^10]: *fossamque et maceriam*: a *fossa* is a trench or ditch, and a *maceria* is a defensive wall

[^11]: *sex in altitudinem pedum*: *to a height of fix feet*

[^12]: *Eius munitionis …. tenebat*: take it like this – *circuitus eius munitionis (quae ab Romanis instituebatur) XI milia passuum tenebat*. This contrasts the Gallic fortifications with the fortifications of the Romans

[^13]: *opportunis locis*: **ablative of location**, *in*….

[^14]: *castella*: *castellum, -i* (n) – fortresses, stronghold. These are placed along a perimeter to watch the enemy and serve as a base from which to attack

[^15]: *stationes*: *statio, -onis* (f) – watch guards, sentries

[^16]: *ne qua subito eruptio fieret*: **negative purpose clause**, *so that…..not…*. *Qua* is short for *aliqua*, with the *ali*- dropping out after *ne*. (After *si, nisi, num, and ne*, all the *ali*-’s fly away! Yep, that's a real rule....) This means that you won’t get _aliqui_ for “anyone”, you’ll just get _qui_, or whatever case it’s in.

[^17]: *haec eadem*: *these same things*, referring to the *castella*. These other words for watchmen must have some slight difference from the *stationes* above


