---
layout: page
title: Ch. 71
nav_order: 4
parent: Surrounding Alesia
---

# Ch. 71

- [Link to Latin Library](https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/caesar/gallic/gall7.shtml#71)

## Sending for Help 

Vercingetorix, priusquam munitiones ab Romanis perficiantur, consilium capit[^1] omnem ab se equitatum noctu dimittere. 2 Discedentibus[^2] mandat[^3] ut suam quisque eorum civitatem adeat omnesque qui[^4] per aetatem arma ferre possint ad bellum cogant. 3 Sua in illos merita proponit obtestaturque[^5] ut suae salutis rationem habeant neu[^6] se[^7] optime de communi libertate meritum in cruciatum hostibus dedant. Quod[^8] si indiligentiores[^9] fuerint, milia hominum delecta[^10] octoginta una[^11] secum interitura[^12] demonstrat. 4 Ratione[^13] inita se exigue dierum triginta habere frumentum, sed paulo[^14] etiam longius[^14] tolerari posse parcendo[^15]. His datis mandatis, 5 qua[^16] opus erat intermissum, secunda vigilia silentio equitatum mittit. 6 Frumentum omne ad se referri iubet; capitis[^17] poenam eis qui non paruerint constituit: 7 pecus, cuius magna erat copia ab Mandubiis compulsa, viritim distribuit; frumentum parce et paulatim metiri instituit; 8 copias omnes quas pro oppido collocaverat in oppidum recepit. 9 His[^18] rationibus auxilia Galliae exspectare et bellum parat administrare.


[^1]: *consilium capit*: *consilium capere* = "to make a plan". Here, it start off **indirect statement**

[^2]: *Discedentibus mandat*: your participle, *discedentibus*, is a **substantive participle** here, meaning that it is used as a noun, *those departing*. Verbs of ordering (*mando, praecipio, impero*, etc) take a **dative of interest**

[^3]: *mandat ut*: verbs of ordering often take *ut* + **subjunctive** as an **indirect command**, except for *iubeo* which takes an **accusative** and **infinitive**. You order thatttttttt (*ut*) someone does something, as an **indirect command**, as opposed to using an **imperative**, “do it!” as a direct command. All this to say, the *ut* here is “that,” NOT “so that.”

[^4]: *qui per aetatem arma ferre possint*: the **relative clause** with a **subjunctive verb** is a **relative clause of characteristic**. Since they’re not looking for anyone specific, just *the kind of people who would be able to bear arms*, you’d use a **relative clause of characteristic**.

[^5]: *obtestaturque ut …. habeant*: *he urged them that they should have a plan/care for his safety*. The **reflexive** is used to show that Vercingetorix wants these Gauls to care for his own (Vercingetorix’s safety) and not abandon him, thinking only of their own safety.

[^6]: *Neu*: *and that they not*….

[^7]: *Se… meritum*: *him* (Vercingetorix) *most deserved of the common freedom* (for all he’s done/plans to do for the Gauls)

[^8]: *Quod si*: *but if*

[^9]: *Indiligentiores*: note the **comparative**

[^10]: *Delecta*: PPP from *deligo*, “to choose, select, enlist”

[^11]: *Una*: *together*, as an **adverb**

[^12]: *Interitura*: recognize this as a **FAP**, -*urus*. Since you’re in **indirect statement** after the upcoming *demonstrat*, you can say “that 80,000 men would die (were going to die)”

[^13]: *Ratione inita*: an **ablative absolute**. The idea of the *ratio*, plan, starts off **indirect statement**, a plan thattttt…..

[^14]: *paulo … longius*: *longius* is a **comparative adverb**, *longer*. *Paulo* is **ablative degree of difference**, *by a little*. This shows us to what degree (by how much) something is different. You could be taller than your friend *by a head*, or stronger than your brother *by a lot*, or just *by a little bit*.

[^15]: *Parcendo*: this is an **FPP** being used on its own, meaning it is not describing another noun. This makes it a **gerund**, which is “the act of verbing.” Here, it is in the ablative case, as an **ablative of means**. Translate it as *by sparing*, meaning “by not using a lot of the food.” **Gerunds** are only be found in the non-nominative cases

[^16]: *Qua opus erat intermissum*: *qua* is **ablative of location**, *where the siege fortifications have been left off*, meaning “where there was a gap in the fortifications”

[^17]: *capitis poenam*: literally “punishment of the head,” meaning death penalty

[^18]: *His rationibus*: **ablative of means**, *by these methods/plans*
